The term drive refers to a physical storage device such as a hard disk, solid-state disk, removable USB flash drive etc. In Unix-like operating systems devices are represented by special file system objects called device nodes which are visible under the  /dev directory.

Storage devices are labeled under /dev according to the type of device followed by a letter signifying the order in which they were detected by the system. In Linux prior to kernel version 2.6.20 the prefix hd signified an IDE device, so for instance the device files /dev/hda, /dev/hdb and /dev/hdc corresponded to the first, second and third IDE device respectively. The prefix sd was originally used for SCSI devices, but is now used for all PATA and SATA devices, including devices on a IDE bus. If there are more than 26 such devices in the system, devices from the 27th onwards are labeled /dev/sdAa, /dev/sdAb and so on.

A physical storage device can be divided into multiple logical storage units known as partitions. Each partition will show up under /dev as a separate device node. A number after the device letter signifies the number of the partion, so for example the device node files /dev/sda1 and /dev/sda2 refer to the first and second partition of the first PATA device. Note that on PCs using MBR partitioning, due to the limit of four primary paritions and the way extended partitions are handled the partition numbering can slightly differ from the actual partition count.

Other Unix-like systems may refer to disks and partitions in other ways. For example, FreeBSD uses /dev/adaX (where X is one or more digits) to refer to PATA disks and /dev/adaXpY (where X and Y are both one or more digits) to refer to partitions on PATA disks.

The term volume in Linux is related to the Logical Volume Manager (LVM), which can be used to manage mass storage devices. A physical volume is a storage device or partition. A logical volume created by the LVM is a logical storage device which can span multiple physical volumes.
