A proportional–integral–derivative controller (PID controller or three-term controller) is a control loop mechanism employing feedback that is widely used in industrial control systems and a variety of other applications requiring continuously modulated control. A PID controller continuously calculates an error value e(t) as the difference between a desired setpoint (SP) and a measured process variable (PV) and applies a correction based on proportional, integral, and derivative terms (denoted P, I, and D respectively), hence the name.

In practical terms it automatically applies an accurate and responsive correction to a control function. An everyday example is the cruise control on a car, where ascending a hill would lower speed if only constant engine power were applied. The controller's PID algorithm restores the measured speed to the desired speed with minimal delay and overshoot by increasing the power output of the engine.

The first theoretical analysis and practical application was in the field of automatic steering systems for ships, developed from the early 1920s onwards. It was then used for automatic process control in the manufacturing industry, where it was widely implemented in at first pneumatic, and then electronic controllers. Today the PID concept is used universally in applications requiring accurate and optimized automatic control.

Term P is proportional to the current value of the SP − PV error e(t). For example, if the error is large and positive, the control output will be proportionately large and positive, taking into account the gain factor "K". Using proportional control alone will result in an error between the setpoint and the actual process value because it requires an error to generate the proportional response. If there is no error, there is no corrective response.   
Term I accounts for past values of the SP − PV error and integrates them over time to produce the I term. For example, if there is a residual SP − PV error after the application of proportional control, the integral term seeks to eliminate the residual error by adding a control effect due to the historic cumulative value of the error. When the error is eliminated, the integral term will cease to grow. This will result in the proportional effect diminishing as the error decreases, but this is compensated for by the growing integral effect.    
Term D is a best estimate of the future trend of the SP − PV error, based on its current rate of change. It is sometimes called "anticipatory control", as it is effectively seeking to reduce the effect of the SP − PV error by exerting a control influence generated by the rate of error change. The more rapid the change, the greater the controlling or damping effect.

| Parameter |	Rise time	|Overshoot|	Settling time|	Steady-state error	|Stability|
| --- | --- | ---| ---| ---| ---|
| Kp|	Decrease|	Increase|	Small change	|Decrease|	Degrade|
| Ki	|Decrease	|Increase	|Increase	|Eliminate|	Degrade|
|Kd	|Minor change|	Decrease	|Decrease|	No effect in theory|	Improve if Kd small|

P Control. Output power is directly proportional to control error. The higher the proportion coefficient, the less the output power at the same control error. Proportional control can be recommended for fast-response systems with a large transmission coefficient. To adjust the propotional controller you should first set the maximum proportion coefficient where in the output power decreases to zero. When the measured value is stabilized, set a specified value and gradually reduce the proportion coefficient and the control error will decrease. If there are periodic oscillations in the system, the proportion coefficient should be increased so that control error is minimal periodic oscillations decrease to the limit.

PI Control. Output power equals to the sum of proportion and integration coefficients. The higher the proportion coefficient, the less the output power at the same control error. The higher the integration coefficient, the slower the accumulated integration coefficient. PI control provides zero control error and and is insensitive to interference of the measurement channel. The PI control disadvantage is slow reaction to disturbances. To adjust the PI controller you should first set the integration time equal to zero, and the maximum proportion time. Then by decreasing the coefficient of proportionality, achieve periodic oscillations in the system. Close to the optimum value of the coefficient of proportionality is twice higher than that at which any hesitation, and close to the optimum value of the integration time constant - is 20% less than the oscillation period.

PID Control. Output power equals to the sum of three coefficients: proportional, integral and differential. The higher the proportion coefficient, the less the output power at the same control error. The higher the integration coefficient, the slower the accumulated integration coefficient. The higher the differentiation coefficient, the greater the response of the system to the disturbance. The PID controller is used in inertial systems with relatively low noise level of the measuring channel. The advantage of PID is fast warm up time, accurate setpoint temperature control and fast reaction to disturbances. Manual tuning PID is extremely complex, so it is recommended is to use the autotune function.
