Each VLAN provides data link access to all hosts connected to switch ports configured with the same VLAN ID. The VLAN tag is a 12-bit field in the Ethernet header that provides support for up to 4,096 VLANs per switching domain. VLAN tagging is standardized in IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) 802.1Q and is often called Dot1Q.

When an untagged frame is received from an attached host, the VLAN ID tag configured on that interface is added to the data link frame header, using the 802.1Q format. The 802.1Q frame is then forwarded toward the destination. Each switch uses the tag to keep each VLAN's traffic separate from other VLANs, forwarding it only where the VLAN is configured. Trunk links between switches handle multiple VLANs, using the tag to keep them segregated. When the frame reaches the destination switch port, the VLAN tag is removed before the frame is to be transmitted to the destination device.

Multiple VLANs can be configured on a single port using a trunk configuration in which each frame sent via the port is tagged with the VLAN ID, as described above. The neighboring device's interface, which may be on another switch or on a host that supports 802.1Q tagging, will need to support trunk mode configuration to transmit and receive tagged frames. Any untagged Ethernet frames are assigned to a default VLAN, which can be designated in the switch configuration.

When a VLAN-enabled switch receives an untagged Ethernet frame from an attached host, it adds the VLAN tag assigned to the ingress interface. The frame is forwarded to the port of the host with the destination MAC address(media access control address). Broadcast, unknown unicast and multicast (BUM traffic) is forwarded to all ports in the VLAN. When a previously unknown host replies to an unknown unicast frame, the switches learn the location of this host and do not flood subsequent frames addressed to that host.

