An Interface Definition Language (IDL) is a language that is used to define the interface between a client and server
process in a distributed system. Each interface definition language also has a set of associated IDL compilers, one per
supported target language. An IDL compiler compiles the interface specifications, listed in an IDL input file, into
source code (e.g., C/C++, Java) that implements the low-level communication details required to support the defined
interfaces. IDL can also be used to populate an implementation repository, which other programs can use to look up
information on an interface at runtime. This is necessary when a program, such as a debugger or interface browser,
does not have access to an application's IDL file.
One advantage of an interface definition language is that it does not contain any mechanism for specifying
computational details. The stubbed out routines, generated by the IDL compiler, must be filled in with implementation
specific details provided by the application developer. Thus, an IDL clearly enforces the separation of a distributed
application’s interface from its implementation.
Another advantage of an IDL is the productivity enhancement provided by the IDL compiler. Without the IDL
compiler, the developer would have to custom craft the network protocol for each distributed application developed,
which would be both time consuming and error prone. The IDL compiler frees the developer from these low-level
details, thus providing more time for the developer to focus on the application’s core functionality.
These IDL benefits, as well as others described below, have enabled many of the successes achieved by middleware
(see Middleware) and distributed applications (see Distributed Applications).
