You can have one physical network and configure two or more logical networks by simply assigning different subnets, like 192.168.0.0 and 192.168.1.0. The problem, though, is that both subnets transmit data through the same switch. Traffic going through the switch can be seen by all other hosts, no matter which subnet they’re on. The result is that security is low and there will be less bandwidth available since all traffic uses the same backbone.

As an alternative, you can create a VLAN for each logical network. Bandwidth availability for each VLAN (or logical network) is no longer shared, and security is improved because the switch that connects each VLAN network (in theory…) will not allow traffic to cross between the VLANs.

Usually VLANs are the better choice for many applications, including audio, but there are times when subnetting makes sense. The main reasons are:

Mitigating performance problems because LANs can’t scale indefinitely. Excessive broadcasts or flooding of frames to unknown destinations will limit their scale. Either of these conditions can be caused by making a single broadcast domain in an Ethernet LAN too big. Bandwidth exhaustion (unless it’s caused by broadcast packets or flooding of frames) is not typically solved with VLANs and subnetting, though, since they won’t increase the amount of bandwidth available. It usually happens because of a lack of physical connectivity (too few NICs on a server, too few ports in a group, the need to move up to a faster port speed, etc.). The first step is to monitor network traffic and identify trouble spots. Once you know how traffic moves around on your LAN, you can begin to think about subnetting for performance reasons.
A desire to limit / control traffic moving between hosts at layer 3 or above. If you want to control IP (or TCP, or UDP, etc.) traffic between hosts, rather than attacking the problem at layer 2, you might consider subnetting and adding firewalls / routers with ACLs between the subnets.
