Volumes are the preferred mechanism for persisting data generated by and used by Docker containers. While bind mounts are dependent on the directory structure of the host machine, volumes are completely managed by Docker. Volumes have several advantages over bind mounts:

* Volumes are easier to back up or migrate than bind mounts.
* You can manage volumes using Docker CLI commands or the Docker API.
* Volumes work on both Linux and Windows containers.
* Volumes can be more safely shared among multiple containers.
* Volume drivers let you store volumes on remote hosts or cloud providers, to encrypt the contents of volumes, or to add other functionality.
* New volumes can have their content pre-populated by a container.

Volumes are stored in a part of the host filesystem which is managed by Docker (/var/lib/docker/volumes/ on Linux). Non-Docker processes should not modify this part of the filesystem. Volumes are the best way to persist data in Docker.

## Good Use of Volume ## 

Volumes are the preferred way to persist data in Docker containers and services. Some use cases for volumes include:

Sharing data among multiple running containers. If you don’t explicitly create it, a volume is created the first time it is mounted into a container. When that container stops or is removed, the volume still exists. Multiple containers can mount the same volume simultaneously, either read-write or read-only. Volumes are only removed when you explicitly remove them.

When the Docker host is not guaranteed to have a given directory or file structure. Volumes help you decouple the configuration of the Docker host from the container runtime.

When you want to store your container’s data on a remote host or a cloud provider, rather than locally.

When you need to back up, restore, or migrate data from one Docker host to another, volumes are a better choice. You can stop containers using the volume, then back up the volume’s directory (such as /var/lib/docker/volumes/<volume-name>).
