The next step is to start reading symbols from the objfile. By symbols, we mean the mapping between a textual label (such as a function or variable name) and the address where the object of interest is found. It corresponds to the content of the ELF symbol table which you can see when using “readelf --syms” on your executable. Even if the executable does not contain debug symbols, it may include a symbol table if it has not been stripped. gdb calls these minimal symbols. As the name suggests, it is the very least meta-data you can have about your program. It is "better than nothing". If you don’t have full debug infos, minimal symbols will at least allow you to locate the start of a function in order to place a breakpoint there or guess in which function a certain code address is.

After minimal symbols are read, gdb will try to read more advanced information. In particular, it will probe for DWARF debug informations and load it if present. This allows for a more “complete” debugging experience, providing an extensive mapping between source code and instructions. Since this info represents a lot of data, it is done in two steps. A first quick pass over the debug info is done to build partial symbol tables. These contain just enough information to know what informations can be found in the debug info. When some specific information is required, the corresponding debug info section is read again in more details to build the full symbol table. Note that the user can force gdb to skip the partial symbol table step and immediately read the full debug symbols by using --readnow.

The way to read symbols from an objfile depends very much on the format of the executable. Symbols are not read the same way from an ELF binary than they are from a COFF binary. To keep the main algorithm independent from the binary format, gdb loads a particular set of functions to do different symbol-related operations, which depends on the binary format. One such set of functions is implemented for each executable format that has support for symbols. In our case, gdb finds that the executable is an ELF and saves in the objfile object a pointer to the ELF-specific symbol functions (elf_sym_fns).
