rsync is a software tool used to either copy files locally, from one path/directory to another, or transfer them between a local computer and a remote one, through a network such as LAN (Local Area Network) or the Internet. Because of its strong capabilities to reduce the amount of data that has to be sent between the local source and the remote destination, it's often used to create off-site backups. These are usually periodic (e.g., daily) and automated. The ability to resume interrupted transfers also makes it suitable for exchanging very large files between two different computers. Of course, it's not limited to these use cases; the large amount of command line options make it easily adaptable to other scenarios administrators may encounter.

rsync uses what is called a delta-transfer algorithm which compares files from source and destination and sends only the differences between them. This means that if you have a large database on server1 and you copy it to server2, the first transfer will be normal but subsequent transfers will be much faster. For example, you may have a 100GB database, but since the last synchronization, only a few megabytes have changed. rsync will only send a few megabytes across the network to refresh the backup of your database on server2. Data can also be compressed before it is sent to the remote location, shortening the time it takes to complete transfers even more, especially in the case of highly compressible content (e.g., some types of databases or text-based files).
